# Mutation Load Estimation Model and Prediction of the Response to Cancer Immunotherapy
## Background
Immunotherapy using immune checkpoint inhibitors has rendered itself as a promising treatment for cancer in recent years. However, not all patients respond to this novel approach. Therefore, it is crucial to identify patients that can potentially respond to immunotherapy as the result will help with medical decision-making. It has been demonstrated in the literature that the mutation load, defined by the number of nonsynonymous point mutations, could serve as an indicator for a patient’s sensitivity to immunotherapy. Specifically, a high mutation load is associated with improved objective response, durable clinical benefit (DCB), and progression-free survival (PFS) for a certain patient. 

There are a number of ways to determine mutation loads, each having its own pros and cons. For example, whole-exome sequencing is an expensive and time-consuming technique that fails as routine clinical practice. Another method is the next-generation sequencing (NGS) gene panels containing cancer-related genes, which can be used to precisely estimate the mutation loads of cancer patients. Nevertheless, the cost of the NGS gene panels with more than 300 genes is also high and thus not practical for standard clinical tests in most hospitals worldwide, and NGS panels with less than 150 genes show poor predictive accuracy. Hence, a more cost and time-effective alternative to currently existing techniques is in dire need. 

In this project, we aim to replicate the key steps in Lyu et al.’s paper (2018) and to construct a mutation load estimation model specifically for lung adenocarcinoma (AC). We used a relatively small number of genes to estimate the mutation loads of lung AC patients and predict their responses to cancer immunotherapy. 

## Methods
First, we obtained the lung AC somatic mutation data of TCGA database (n=230) from the authors and constructed a mutation matrix as the training data by selecting only the nonsynonymous point mutations (nonsense, nonstop and missense mutations). Then, we selected candidate genes based on the following criteria: mutation frequency ≥ 10%, coding DNA sequence (CDS) length ≤ 15,000, and demonstrating a significant difference in mutation loads between mutated and wild-type patients for a certain gene (Bonferroni corrected p-value < 0.05 in Wilcoxon test). 

The next step was to construct the mutation load estimation model. Specifically, a linear mathematical model was employed. Recursive feature elimination and Bayesian information criterion were used to identify the parameters and genes that would confer the optimal model. 

Finally, we evaluated the performance of our model in terms of both estimation of mutation loads and prediction of immunotherapy responses. First, we obtained the validation data from 2 independent studies (n=181 for Imielinski et al.; n=30 for Rizvi et al., 2015). Then, we determined the correlation between the estimated and actual mutation loads for both the training data and the validation data. A high correlation means that the model works well. For the prediction of treatment responses, we first retrieved the data showing the treatment responses to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy from the paper by Rizvi et al. (2015). A survival analysis was performed to compare PFS between patients with high estimated mutation loads and patients with low estimated mutation loads. Then we predicted whether the patients have durable clinical benefits (DCBs) or no durable benefits (NDBs) following the immunotherapy using the optimal discrimination threshold. The patients with an estimated mutation load higher than the threshold was predicted to have DCBs. In this way, all patients were classified as either DCB or NDB. Eventually, the results obtained from our model were compared with the actual responses in order to assess the accuracy of the prediction. 

## Alternative methods
### Lasso feature selection and linear regression
3668 genes shared between the training and testing datasets were selected to train a Lasso regression model. With a high penalty parameter (λ = 10), the Lasso regression model successfully picked up 25 genes with positive coefficient, which presumably have the most predictive power for the mutation load. The 25 genes were used to train a linear regression model. The linear regression model using the 25 genes selected by the Lasso regression model achieved the best predictive power on the validation data.

### Elastic net
Elastic net is a linear regression model that combines both L1 and L2 regularization can select important features and prevent overfitting during the training process. To take advantage of the automatic feature selection of elastic net, the 65 genes selected according to Lyu et al., (2018) were used to train an elastic net model. The elastic net had better prediction power than the RFE model. It has R2 of 0.95 on the training data and 0.80 on the validation data.

